Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire Poster.jpg
Theatrical release poster
Directed by	Mike Newell
Produced by	David Heyman
Screenplay by	Steve Kloves
Based on	Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire 
by J. K. Rowling
Starring	
Daniel Radcliffe
Rupert Grint
Emma Watson
Music by	
Patrick Doyle
Cinematography	Roger Pratt
Edited by	Mick Audsley
Production
  company	Heyday Films
Distributed by	Warner Bros. Pictures
Release date(s)	
6 November 2005 (London premiere)
18 November 2005 (United Kingdom & United States)
Running time	157 minutes
Country	
United Kingdom
United States
Language	English
Budget	$150 million
Box office	$896,911,078[1]

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire is a 2005 fantasy film directed by Mike Newell and distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures.[1] It is based on the novel of the same name by J. K. Rowling. The film, which is the fourth instalment in the Harry Potter film series, was written by Steve Kloves and produced by David Heyman. The story follows Harry Potter's fourth year at Hogwarts as he is chosen by the Goblet of Fire to compete in the Tri-wizard Tournament. The film stars Daniel Radcliffe as Harry Potter alongside Rupert Grint and Emma Watson as Harry's best friends Ron Weasley and Hermione Granger. It is the sequel to Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban and is followed by Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix.

Filming began in early 2004, and the scenes of Hogwarts took place at the Leavesden Film Studios. Five days after its release, the film had grossed over US$102 million at the North American box office, which is the third-highest first-weekend tally for a Harry Potter film behind Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1 and Part 2. Goblet of Fire enjoyed an immensely successful run at the box office, earning just under $900 million worldwide, which made it the highest-grossing film of 2005 and the eighth-highest-grossing film of all time at that time. It was the third-highest-grossing film in the US for 2005, making $290 million. As of January 2014, it is the unadjusted 29th highest-grossing film of all time, and the sixth-highest-grossing film in the Harry Potter series.

The film was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Art Direction, and won the BAFTA Award for Best Production Design. Goblet of Fire was the second Potter film to be released in IMAX. The film is one of the best reviewed instalments within the series, and is noted for the maturity and sophistication of its characters, darker and more complex plotline, writing, and performances of the lead actors.[2]

Plot[edit]
Further information: Plot of the novel
14-year-old Harry Potter dreams of Frank Bryce, who is killed after overhearing Lord Voldemort discussing plans with Peter "Wormtail" Pettigrew and Barty Crouch Jr. At the Quidditch World Cup, Death Eaters terrorise the spectators, and Crouch Jr. summons the Dark Mark, otherwise known as the curse (Morsmordre). At Hogwarts, Albus Dumbledore introduces ex-Auror Alastor "Mad-Eye" Moody as the new Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher. He also announces that the school will host the Triwizard Tournament. The champions are selected by the Goblet of Fire: Cedric Diggory of Hufflepuff is chosen to represent Hogwarts, Viktor Krum will represent Durmstrang Institute, and Fleur Delacour will represent Beauxbatons Academy of Magic. The Goblet unexpectedly chooses a fourth champion: Harry. Dumbledore is unable to pull the underage Harry out of the tournament, as the champions are bound by a magical contract, and therefore, Harry is forced to compete in the deadly match.

For the tournament's first task, the champions must each retrieve a golden egg guarded by a dragon. Harry summons his broomstick to retrieve the egg, which contains information about the second challenge. The Yule Ball takes place, during which Harry's crush Cho Chang attends with Cedric, and Hermione Granger attends with Viktor, which makes Ron Weasley jealous. During the second task, Harry comes in second, behind Cedric. Afterward, Ministry official Barty Crouch, Sr. is found dead by Harry. In the third and final task, the competitors are placed inside a hedge maze and must reach the Triwizard Cup. Viktor, under the Imperius curse, incapacitates Fleur. After Harry and Cedric save each other, the two claim a draw and grab the cup together, which turns out to be a Portkey and transports the two to a graveyard, where Wormtail and Voldemort are waiting. Wormtail kills Cedric with a spell Avada Kedavra and performs a ritual that rejuvenates Voldemort, who then summons the Death Eaters. As Harry battles Voldemort, his wand forces Voldemort's to disgorge the spirits of the people Voldemort has most recently murdered, including Harry's parents and Cedric. Harry is briefly protected by the spirits and escapes with Cedric's body.

Upon his return, Harry tells Dumbledore that Voldemort has returned and is responsible for Cedric's death. Mad-Eye takes Harry back to his home and locks the door and reveals it was he who put Harry's name in the Goblet, cursed Viktor and was responsible for all the things gone wrong and tries to attack Harry. Dumbledore, Severus Snape, and Minerva McGonagall break down his door and force him to drink a truth telling potion. It's also revealed that he is not "Mad-Eye" Moody; the real one is imprisoned in a magical trunk. The false Mad-Eye's Polyjuice Potion wears off and he is revealed as Barty Crouch Jr., working for Voldemort.

Soon after, Hogwarts, Durmstrang and Beauxbatons gather to say farewell to Cedric.

Cast[edit]
Further information: List of Harry Potter cast members
Daniel Radcliffe as Harry Potter.
Rupert Grint as Ron Weasley, Harry's best friend.
Emma Watson as Hermione Granger, Harry's other best friend and the brains of the trio.
Robbie Coltrane as Rubeus Hagrid, the half-giant Gamekeeper and Care of Magical Creatures teacher at Hogwarts and Olympe Maxime's love-interest.
Ralph Fiennes as Lord Voldemort, Harry's nemesis intent on conquering the Wizarding World and leader of the Death Eaters.
Michael Gambon as Albus Dumbledore, the Hogwarts headmaster.
Brendan Gleeson as Alastor Moody, the new Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher. Gleeson also played Moody being impersonated by Barty Crouch Jr., one of Voldemort's most loyal Death Eaters. The real Crouch is portrayed by David Tennant.
Jason Isaacs as Lucius Malfoy, the father of Draco Malfoy and a senior Death Eater.
Gary Oldman as Sirius Black, Harry Potter's godfather escapee of Azkaban.
Miranda Richardson as Rita Skeeter, a journalist for The Daily Prophet.
Alan Rickman as Severus Snape, the Potions master and Head of Slytherin.
Maggie Smith as Minerva McGonagall, the Transfiguration teacher and Head of Gryffindor.
Timothy Spall as Peter Pettigrew, a servant of Voldemort who betrayed Harry Potter's parents.
Frances de la Tour as Olympe Maxime, the Headmistress of Beauxbatons Academy of Magic and Hagrid's romantic interest.
The roles of the three champions of the Triwizard Tournament were played by Robert Pattinson as Cedric Diggory (champion of Hogwarts), Stanislav Ianevski as Victor Krum (champion of Durmstrang), and Clémence Poésy as Fleur Delacour (champion of Beauxbatons).

Production[edit]
British film director Mike Newell was chosen to direct the film after Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban director Alfonso Cuarón announced that he would only direct one Potter film.[3] In a statement explaining the transition of directors, series producer David Heyman said:

“	When Alfonso made the decision to focus on completing Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban, we were faced with the daunting task of finding a director to handle the complex challenges of Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire and to follow in the footsteps of Chris Columbus and Alfonso Cuarón. Mike's rich and diverse body of work show him to be the perfect choice. He has worked with children, made us laugh, and had us sitting on the edge of our seats. He is great with actors and imbues all his characters, all his films, with great humanity. I'm thrilled.	”
Principal photography for Goblet of Fire began on 4 May 2004.[4] Scenes involving the film's principal actors began filming on 25 June 2004 at England's Leavesden Studios.[5][6]

Steve Kloves, the screenwriter for the previous instalments, returned for Goblet of Fire. On adapting the 734-page book into a feature-length film, Kloves commented that "we always thought it would be two movies, but we could never figure out a way to break it in two. So it will be a different experience from the book."[7]

Set design[edit]
"Filming in an actual loch would have been too cold and impractical. We looked into doing a process called 'dry for wet,' where you suspend an actor and blow wind on them to give the illusion that they are underwater, but the hair didn't undulate convincingly."

—Heyman, on the underwater scenes[8]
As in the previous instalments, Stuart Craig and Stephenie McMillan provided the film's art and set designs, respectively. Due to the film's scope, there were many new sets and transformations of old sets created. McMillan was most excited about redesigning the Great Hall for the scenes involving the Yule Ball. "Originally we thought silver curtains, silver table cloths and an ice dance floor," said McMillan, "but it just went on and on. The drapes man eventually said, ‘Why not just stick the fabrics on the wall?”[9] Each task of the Triwizard Tournament required massive sets. The rock quarry set for the first task, where Harry faces off with the Hungarian Horntail, was built in two sections at Leavesden Studios. Craig called it "one of the biggest sets we've ever built for any of the films."[8] For the second task, involving the film's underwater scenes, the film crew designed and built a blue screen tank holding "about half a million gallons of water."[10] As for the final task, which took place in the maze, hedge walls ranging from 20 to 40 feet tall were constructed and enhanced with computer-generated imagery.[11]

Music[edit]
Main article: Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire (soundtrack)
As early as 2004, it was speculated that John Williams would not return to score the fourth instalment due to a busy 2005 schedule.[12] Rumors then began to circulate that Pulp lead singer Jarvis Cocker was to score the film,[13] but those rumours were soon corrected as it was reported that Cocker and other musicians would be appearing in cameo roles of a wizard rock group.[14] With Newell at the helm of the film, Patrick Doyle was ultimately chosen to score the film (having previously collaborated with Newell for Into the West and Donnie Brasco).

Differences from the book[edit]


Director Mike Newell described the book as "big as a house brick".[15]
With the Goblet of Fire novel almost twice the length of Prisoner of Azkaban, the writers and producers reduced certain scenes and concepts to make the transition from page to screen. Director Mike Newell described the problem as one of "compressing a huge book into the compass of a movie".[16] This was achieved by "putting aside" all the components of the novel which did not directly relate to Harry and his journey.[16] Even producer David Heyman admitted missing many of the scenes which were removed.

Goblet of Fire is the first film adaptation not to begin at Privet Drive; after the opening sequence, Harry awakens at the Burrow on the morning of the Quidditch World Cup.[17] This makes Goblet of Fire the first film in the series in which the Dursleys do not appear.

The game play at the Quidditch World Cup was removed for timing reasons, leaving an abrupt temporal jump which some reviewers considered awkward or "rushed". In the book, Harry and many of the Weasleys supported Ireland, while in the film Harry and Ron supported Bulgaria. However, they also love Viktor Krum, from Bulgaria.[18]

Other scenes are shortened and amalgamated to include only the most essential plot details: the three Death Eater trials Harry witnesses in the Pensieve are merged into one sequence; the characters of Ludo Bagman, Winky, Narcissa Malfoy and Bertha Jorkins are absent, as well as Dobby, who was supposed to help Harry in the second task; there is no train scene at the end where Rita Skeeter is revealed to be an illegal, unregistered animagus; Harry is never seen either receiving or giving away the 1,000 galleons in prize winnings; lastly, all of Sirius Black's lines are condensed into a single fireside conversation.[17]

Distribution[edit]
Marketing[edit]
An exclusive first-look of the film was shown on ABC during the television premiere of Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets on 7 May 2005.[19] The first trailer was made available online on 8 May 2005.[20] The international trailer debuted online on 23 August 2005.[21]

The video game version, designed by EA UK, was released 8 November 2005.[22] Mattel released a line of action figures and artefacts based on the film.[23] Among these was the first edition of Harry Potter Scene It? containing over 1,000 questions involving the four films.[24]

Rating[edit]
Goblet of Fire was the first film in the series to receive a PG-13 rating by the MPAA for "sequences of fantasy violence and frightening images", M by the ACB[25] and a 12A by the BBFC for its dark themes, fantasy violence, threat and frightening images.

Wyrd Sisters lawsuit[edit]
In the run up to the film, Warner Bros. approached a Canadian folk group called the Wyrd Sisters to obtain permission to use the name THE WEIRD SISTERS for its Harry Potter Band. When a deal could not be made, the Canadian band filed a US$40-million lawsuit against Warner Bros., the North American distributor of the film, as well as the members of the in-movie band (members of the bands Radiohead and Pulp, among others)[26] for the misuse of their group's name. (In a deleted scene, they are simply introduced as "the band that needs no introduction") The Canadian band also brought an injunction to stop the release of the film in its country as it contained a performance by the identically named fictional rock band. An Ontario judge dismissed this motion, and to avoid further controversy Warner Bros. rendered the band unnamed in the film and many derived products. However, the Winnipeg-based group continued to pursue the lawsuit; lead singer Kim Baryluk stated in her claim that "consumers will assume that the smaller and less famous Canadian band is trying to take advantage of the Harry Potter fame by copying the Harry Potter band's name when in fact the reverse is true."[27] The injunction was dismissed, and the band was ordered to pay costs.[28][29] As of March 2010, the lawsuit has been settled, the details sealed.[30]

Theatrical release[edit]
Goblet of Fire was the second film in the series to be given a simultaneous release in conventional theatres and IMAX.[31] Dubbed as Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire: The IMAX Experience, the film was digitally remasterd for IMAX from its 35mm form to take part in a "commercial growth strategy" set up between IMAX and Warner Bros. Pictures.[32][33]

The film was released in most countries within a two-week period starting on 18 November 2005 in the United Kingdom and United States, with a 1 December 2005 release in Australia. In the United States, the film opened in a maximum of 3,858 cinemas that included several IMAX screens.[1]

The world premiere of the film took place in London, England on 6 November 2005.[34] One of the features of the premiere was an animatronic, fire-breathing Hungarian Horntail.[35] The 40-foot-long dragon, used during the scene where Hagrid leads Harry into the forest a night before the first task, was designed and built by the film's special effects supervisor John Richardson and creature effects & makeup supervisor Nick Dudman.[8]

Home media[edit]
The film was released on DVD in North America on 7 March 2006. It was available in one- and two-disc editions, as well as part of an 8-disc box set that includes all four films made by that time.[36] The bonus disc features three interactive games, as well as seven behind the scenes featurettes. The film was also released in UMD format for PSP.

On its first day of release in North America, over 5 million copies were sold, recording a franchise high for first-day sales. Within its first week it sold over a total of 9 million units of combined sales of both the widescreen and full-screen versions of the DVD.[37]

The UK edition was released on DVD on 20 March 2006 and became the fastest selling UK DVD ever, selling six copies per second on its first day of release. According to the Official Charts Company, the DVD sold 1.4 million copies in its first week alone. It is also available in a two-disc edition with special features similar to the North American two-disc edition.[38]

Currently, the DVD holds the Guinness World Record for being the fastest selling DVD of all time. The achievement was added to the 2007 book edition of The Guinness World Records, which includes a picture of the award being presented to Dan Radcliffe on set of Order of the Phoenix at Leavesden Film Studios in April 2006.[39]

In the United States, the first five Harry Potter films were released on HD DVD and Blu-ray disc on 11 December 2007. The fourth film has since become available in numerous box sets containing the other films released in the series, including the Harry Potter: Complete 8-Film Collection and Harry Potter Wizard's Collection. An Ultimate Edition of Goblet of Fire was released on 19 October 2010, featuring behind-the-scenes footage, trailers, additional scenes, and a feature-length special Creating the World of Harry Potter Part 4: Sound & Music.[40] Despite not being included in the Ultimate Edition, an extended version has been shown during certain television airings with a running time of about 167 minutes.[41]

Reaction[edit]
Box office[edit]
After an opening day of $40m at the North American box office and staying at No. 1 for three weeks, Goblet of Fire enjoyed a successful 20-week run in cinemas, closing on 6 April 2006. The film set numerous records including the highest non-May opening weekend in the US and earned £14.9m in its opening weekend in the UK, a record which has since been beaten by the 2008 James Bond film, Quantum of Solace, which took in £15.4m. Goblet of Fire drew $102.7 million its opening weekend at the North American box office, setting a new opening high for the franchise and also achieved the highest weekend debut in November, with the latter being surpassed by The Twilight Saga: New Moon in 2009.[42] It sold about as many tickets as Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone did in its opening weekend. The film's franchise record was later overtaken in 2010 by Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1, which opened to $125 million; Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 followed with $169.1 million opening weekend. Goblet of Fire's debut marked the fourth $100 million weekend in history and as of July 2011 stands as the 17th largest opening weekend ever. In Mainland China, the film generated 93 million yuan.

Goblet of Fire earned almost US$897 million worldwide, making it the highest-grossing international and worldwide release of 2005.

In IMAX theatres only, the film grossed a total of US$20,033,758 worldwide for a cumulative per screen average of $188,998 thus setting a new record and a new milestone for a digitally remastered 2-D IMAX release.

In January 2006, Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire surpassed the box office takings of Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets, to become the eighth-highest-grossing film worldwide at the time, and the second-highest-grossing film in the Harry Potter series, behind Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone. As of July 2011 it is the sixth-highest-grossing Harry Potter film behind The Philosopher's Stone, Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix and Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1 and Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2.[43]

The film ranks third in the North American box office behind Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith and The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe for 2005, although both films rank lower than Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire in worldwide terms.[1]