The Big Bang Theory
BigBangTheoryTitleCard.png
Genre	Sitcom[1]
Created by	Chuck Lorre
Bill Prady
Directed by	Mark Cendrowski
Starring	
Johnny Galecki
Jim Parsons
Kaley Cuoco
Simon Helberg
Kunal Nayyar
Sara Gilbert
Melissa Rauch
Mayim Bialik
Kevin Sussman[2]
Theme music composer	Barenaked Ladies
Opening theme	"Big Bang Theory Theme"[3][4]
Country of origin	United States
Original language(s)	English
No. of seasons	7
No. of episodes	159 (List of episodes)
Production
Executive producer(s)	Chuck Lorre
Bill Prady
Steven Molaro
Producer(s)	Faye Oshima Belyeu
Editor(s)	Peter Chakos
Camera setup	Multi-camera
Running time	18–22 minutes (without commercials)
Production company(s)	Chuck Lorre Productions
Warner Bros. Television
Broadcast
Original channel	CBS
Picture format	HDTV 1080i
Audio format	DTS-HD Master Audio 5.1
Original run	September 24, 2007 – present

The Big Bang Theory is an American sitcom created by Chuck Lorre and Bill Prady, both of whom serve as executive producers on the show along with Steven Molaro. All three also serve as head writers. It premiered on CBS on September 24, 2007.[5] The seventh season premiered on September 26, 2013.[6]

The show is primarily centered on five characters living in Pasadena, California: roommates Leonard Hofstadter and Sheldon Cooper, both physicists; Penny, a waitress and aspiring actress who lives across the hall; and Leonard and Sheldon's equally geeky and socially awkward friends and co-workers, mechanical engineer Howard Wolowitz and astrophysicist Raj Koothrappali. The geekiness and intellect of the four guys is contrasted for comic effect with Penny's social skills and common sense.[7][8]

Over time, supporting characters have been promoted to starring roles: Leslie Winkle, a physicist colleague at Caltech and, at different times, a lover of both Leonard and Howard; Bernadette Rostenkowski, Howard's girlfriend (later his wife), a microbiologist and former part-time waitress alongside Penny; neuroscientist Amy Farrah Fowler, who joins the group after being matched to Sheldon on a dating website (and later becomes Sheldon's girlfriend), and Stuart Bloom, the cash-strapped owner of the comic book store the characters often visit.

In February 2014, CBS CEO Les Moonves confirmed an eighth season, when announcing the first portion of the new season would air on a different night, due to CBS acquiring the rights to Thursday Night Football games. In March 2014, CBS once again renewed the show for three additional years — including the previously confirmed eighth season — through the 2016–17 television season.[9] In May 2014, CBS announced at its annual upfront presentation, that the series would begin its eighth season on Mondays, before return to the Thursday slot it has held since 2010, once the football games end in late October.[10]

Production
The show's initial pilot, developed for the 2006–07 television season, was substantially different from its current form. The only characters from the initial pilot that were kept for the reshot pilot for the series were Leonard and Sheldon (portrayed by Johnny Galecki and Jim Parsons, respectively, and named after Sheldon Leonard).[11] The cast was rounded off by two female leads: Canadian actress Amanda Walsh as Katie, "a street-hardened, tough-as-nails, woman with a vulnerable interior" who the boys meet after she breaks up with her boyfriend and invite to live in their apartment (Katie was replaced by Penny, portrayed by Kaley Cuoco, in the second pilot);[12][13] and Iris Bahr as Gilda, a scientist colleague and friend of the boys who was threatened by Katie's presence. The initial pilot used Thomas Dolby's hit "She Blinded Me with Science" as theme music.

The series was not picked up, but the creators were given an opportunity to retool the show and produce a second pilot. They brought in the remaining cast and retooled the show to its final format. The original unaired pilot has never been officially released, but it has circulated on the Internet. On the evolution of the show, Chuck Lorre said, "We did the 'Big Bang Pilot' about two and a half years ago, and it sucked... but there were two remarkable things that worked perfectly, and that was Johnny and Jim. We rewrote the thing entirely, and then we were blessed with Kaley and Simon and Kunal." As to whether the world will ever see that original pilot, maybe on a future DVD release, Lorre said, "Wow, that would be something, we will see. Show your failures..."[14]

The first and second pilots of The Big Bang Theory were directed by James Burrows, who did not continue with the show. The reworked second pilot led to a 13-episode order by CBS on May 14, 2007.[15] Prior to its airing on CBS, the pilot episode was distributed on iTunes free of charge. The show premiered September 24, 2007, and was picked up for a full 22-episode season on October 19, 2007.[16] The show is filmed in front of a live audience,[17] and is produced by Warner Bros. Television and Chuck Lorre Productions.[18] Production was halted on November 6, 2007, due to the Writers Guild of America strike. Nearly 3 months later, on February 4, 2008, the series was temporarily replaced by a short-lived sitcom, Welcome to the Captain. The series returned on March 17, 2008 in an earlier time slot[19] and ultimately only 17 episodes were produced for the first season.[20][21] After the strike ended, the show was picked up for a second season airing in the 2008–2009 season, premiering in the same time slot on September 22, 2008.[22] With increasing ratings, the show received a two-year renewal through the 2010–11 season in 2009.[23][24] In 2011, the show was picked up for three more seasons.[25] In March 2014, the show was renewed again for three more years through the 2016–17 season. This marks the second time the series has gained a three-year renewal.[9]

David Saltzberg, a professor of physics and astronomy at the University of California, Los Angeles, checks scripts and provides dialogue, mathematics equations, and diagrams used as props.[7] According to executive producer/co-creator Bill Prady, "We're working on giving Sheldon an actual problem that he's going to be working on throughout the [first] season so there's actual progress to the boards ... We worked hard to get all the science right."[8]

Several of the actors in The Big Bang Theory previously worked together on Roseanne including Johnny Galecki, Sara Gilbert, and Laurie Metcalf (who plays Sheldon's mother, Mary Cooper). Additionally, Lorre was a writer on the series for several seasons.

Theme song


Single cover for "Big Bang Theory Theme" by Barenaked Ladies (2007)
The Canadian alternative rock band Barenaked Ladies wrote and recorded the show's theme song, which describes the history and formation of the universe and the Earth. Ed Robertson, lead singer and guitarist in the band, was asked by Lorre and Prady to write a theme song for the show after the producers attended one of the band's concerts in Los Angeles. By coincidence, Robertson had recently read Simon Singh's book, Big Bang,[26][27] and at the concert, he improvised a freestyle rap about the origins of the universe.[citation needed] Lorre and Prady phoned Robertson shortly thereafter and asked him to write the theme song. Having been asked to write songs for other films and shows only to have them rejected in favor of other artists' songs, Robertson agreed to write the theme only after learning that Lorre and Prady had not asked anyone else.

On October 9, 2007, a full-length (1 minute and 45 seconds) version of the song was released commercially.[28] Although some sources identify the song title as "History of Everything",[29] the cover art for the single identifies the title as Big Bang Theory Theme. A music video was also released via special features on The Complete Fourth Season DVD and Blu-ray set.[30][31] The theme was included on the band's greatest hits album, Hits from Yesterday & the Day Before, which was released on September 27, 2011.[32]

Actors' salaries
For the first three seasons, Galecki, Parsons, and Cuoco, the three main stars of the show, received at most $60,000 per episode. The salary for the three went up to $200,000 per episode for the fourth season. Their per-episode pay went up an additional $50,000 in each of the following three seasons, culminating in $350,000 per episode in the seventh season.[33][34]

Main cast
Main article: List of The Big Bang Theory characters


Main characters in The Big Bang Theory. First row from left: Raj Koothrappali, Leonard Hofstadter, Penny, Sheldon Cooper and Howard Wolowitz. Second row from left: Bernadette Rostenkowski-Wolowitz and Amy Farrah Fowler.
These actors are credited in all episodes of the series:

Johnny Galecki[35] as Leonard Hofstadter, Ph.D. – An experimental physicist with an IQ of 173. He received his Ph.D. when he was 24 years old. He is originally from New Jersey. The straight man of the series, he shares an apartment with colleague and friend Sheldon Cooper in Pasadena. The writers immediately implied potential romance between him and neighbor Penny, and their tension is frequently explored including occasional dating. In Season 3, Leonard begins an on-again, off-again romantic relationship with Penny, although the two continue to live separately. In Season 5, Leonard and Penny get back together, and begin what they refer to as a "relationship beta test", in which either Leonard or Penny would report a "bug" to the other person, and either one would address it. The reboot is succeesful, and they grow closer. At the end of Season 7, Leonard proposes to Penny and she accepts.
Jim Parsons[36] as Sheldon Cooper, M.A., Ph.D.[37] – Originally from Galveston, Texas,[38] he was a child prodigy with an eidetic memory who began college at the age of 11 (after completing the fifth grade), started graduate studies at 14, and earned a Ph.D. at 16. A theoretical physicist researching quantum mechanics and string theory, he has two master's degrees, a Ph.D., a Sc.D., and an IQ of 187. He exhibits a strict adherence to routine and a lack of understanding of irony and sarcasm; he is also uninterested in many of the romantic hijinks of his friends. Sheldon shares an apartment with Leonard Hofstadter, across the hall from Penny, and relies on both for advice in social situations. Sheldon is very egotistical, as he often boasts about his 'superior' intelligence, and sometimes underestimates that of his friends. Sheldon relies on his friends (usually Leonard) to drive him around, and he eventually tries to go for his driver's license in season 2, but fails to complete the task, as he finds many practical (even straightforward) aspects of life difficult to deal with. In the fourth season, he begins a relationship with Amy Farrah Fowler, who becomes his girlfriend during the fifth season, even though he is wary of germs and physical contact. He is a somewhat introverted and socially awkward character, except when it comes to getting his own way or belittling the accomplishments of his friends, which often comes across as petty and childlike. He can also be quite spiteful as he has no understanding of tact. When he becomes frustrated, fears he is losing an argument, or has trouble keeping a secret, he suffers from facial twitching which he finds difficult to control. Sheldon also follows an extremely ritualized way of living and has an obsession to see things completed (e.g., sitting in the same spot on the sofa or knocking on a door three times before saying the name of whom he's addressing and repeating this three times, to name a few examples).
Kaley Cuoco[39] as Penny – From a town outside of Omaha, Nebraska,[40] she is an aspiring actress who lives across the hall from Sheldon and Leonard. Penny has been on casting calls and auditions but has not been very successful thus far. To pay the bills, she is a waitress and occasional bartender at The Cheesecake Factory until the seventh season. She is not a university graduate but has far more common sense and streetwise social awareness than the other main characters. There is, however, a running joke about her being slovenly and untidy. To date, her family name has not been revealed. She dated Leonard at the end of the first season, and during the third, fifth, and sixth seasons.[41] By season four, Bernadette, Amy and Penny have formed their own group, who like to hang out in Penny's apartment or go out together. Cuoco began being credited as Kaley Cuoco-Sweeting, starting with the season seven episode, "The Convention Conundrum". At the end of Season 7, she accepts Leonard's proposal of marriage (after having proposed to him earlier in the season while intoxicated).
Simon Helberg[42] as Howard Joel Wolowitz,[43] Master of Engineering (M.Eng.)[44] – He works as an aerospace engineer. He is Jewish and lives with his mother. Unlike Sheldon, Leonard, and Raj, Howard lacks a Ph.D, earning him the ridicule of others. He "defends" this by pointing out that he has a master's degree in engineering from the elite MIT and that the apparatus he designs are launched into space, unlike the purely abstract work of his friends, including going to space himself in the Season 5 finale. He exhibits a good line in Jewish humor, which Leonard and Raj seem to occasionally appreciate. Prior to dating and marrying Bernadette, he fancied himself a ladies' man and devised outrageous pick-up lines, with suitably unimpressed reactions from Penny and limited success with other women. He claims to be a polyglot, speaking six different languages, including French, Russian, Mandarin, Farsi, Arabic and Klingon. He dates and later marries Bernadette Rostenkowski, and eventually moves into an apartment with her in the sixth season. In the fifth season, he trained as an astronaut, and went to space in the season finale to serve as a payload specialist on the International Space Station.
Kunal Nayyar[45] as Rajesh Ramayan "Raj" Koothrappali, Ph.D. – Originally from New Delhi, India, he works as a particle astrophysicist at Caltech.[46] His family is very wealthy. He communicates with his parents, Dr. and Mrs. V.M. Koothrappali, via webcam. He was very shy around women and was physically unable to talk to them for the first six seasons of the show (except for his mother and his sister), unless he drank alcoholic beverages (or at least thought he had been drinking alcohol), or had taken experimental medications provided by the pharmacology department at the university. Unfortunately, the former made him have an outrageous, unpredictable personality, while the latter caused unforeseen side effects. However, he often had better luck with women than his overly-confident best friend, Howard. In the final episode of season six, Raj overcomes his inability to speak to women, and can now address them without having alcohol in his system. He has very feminine tastes and often takes on a stereotypical female role in his close friendship with Howard, but he insists that he is not gay.[47] During the fourth season, his sister Priya (Aarti Mann) stays with him and she becomes Leonard's girlfriend (much to Raj's annoyance). In the Season 6 episode "The Tangible Affection Proof", Raj meets Lucy (Kate Micucci) in the comic book store and they begin a brief relationship. However, in the episode "The Bon Voyage Reaction", Lucy ended her relationship with Raj as she was too stressed when he wanted her to meet his friends. At the end of the episode, Raj finally spoke to Penny without consuming alcohol, after becoming heartbroken by his break-up with Lucy.
These actors were first credited as guest stars and later promoted to main cast:

Sara Gilbert as Leslie Winkle, Ph.D. (recurring season 1, starring season 2, recurring season 3)[48][49] – a physicist who works in the same lab as Leonard. In appearance she is essentially Leonard's female counterpart, equipped with the black framed glasses and sweat jackets. She is an enemy of Sheldon's, due to their conflicting scientific theories. Though each considers the other to be intellectually inferior, Leslie is much wittier than Sheldon, regularly calling him "dumbass", and she usually bests him in their repartee. Leslie has had casual sex with Leonard and later Howard; in the case of the former, it reunited Gilbert and Galecki on-screen after the two played the on-screen couple of Darlene Connor and David Healy during the run of Roseanne. Gilbert was promoted to a main cast member during the second season but was demoted back to guest star status because producers could not generate enough content for the character.[48] Gilbert left the series after season 3 concluded to focus her efforts on The Talk, on which she serves as executive producer for CBS.
Melissa Rauch as Bernadette Rostenkowski-Wolowitz, Ph.D. (recurring season 3, starring since season 4)[50] – a young woman with a very high-pitched voice who is initially a waitress and co-worker of Penny's, paying her way through graduate school microbiology studies. She defends her doctoral thesis and lands a high-paying research position at the end of season 4. Bernadette is introduced to Howard by Penny as a result of an agreement between Howard and Leonard tht if either ever ended up with a hot girlfriend, he would get the girlfriend to introduce the other to "a hot chick.". At first they do not get along, apparently having nothing in common. When they find out that they both have overbearing mothers, they feel a connection. During season 3 they date and then break up off-screen, then get back together in season 4. They become engaged near the end of season 4, and marry at the end of season 5.
Mayim Bialik, Ph.D. as Amy Farrah Fowler, Ph.D. (guest starring season 3, starring since mid-season 4)[51] – a woman Raj and Howard met on an online dating site after secretly setting up an account using Sheldon's name and information, prompting Raj to comment when a match comes up, "We finally have proof that aliens walk among us!".[52] The site matches her to Sheldon, and the two share many similar traits though Amy eventually becomes more interested in social and romantic interaction and is slightly more socially aware than Sheldon. Once she and Sheldon meet, she becomes, as Sheldon puts it, a girl who is his friend, but not his "girlfriend". Their relationship slowly progresses through seasons 5 and 6 up to the point where Sheldon considers her his girlfriend. Amy also believes she and Penny are best friends ("besties", by her own definition), a sentiment that at first Penny respectfully indulges but does not share. Penny eventually becomes a real friend, overlooking Amy's Sheldon-like qualities. Amy's admiration for Penny has at times bordered on physical attraction. Amy Fowler has a Ph.D. in neurobiology, while Bialik herself has a doctorate in neuroscience; in the season 1 episode "The Bat Jar Conjecture", Raj suggests recruiting "The girl who plays TV's Blossom" (Bialik) to their Physics Bowl team.
Kevin Sussman as Stuart Bloom (recurring seasons 2–5, starring season 6, recurring season 7) – Stuart is a mild-mannered yet under-confident individual who runs the comic book store that the guys frequently visit. He is also a geek, but he has a talent for drawing, is a graduate of Rhode Island School of Design and possesses slightly better social skills than the rest of the guys. During Stuart's first appearance, the guys brought Penny along to the store and he managed to ask her on a date. They go on a few dates until Penny mistakenly calls him "Leonard", leaving him devastated. As Stuart runs a comic book store, he has vast knowledge of comic books and superheroes. In the Season 4 episode "The Toast Derivation", he implied he was in financial trouble and that the comic book store is now also his home. At Howard's bachelor party during "The Stag Convergence", Stuart uses his toasting turn to tell Howard how lucky he is and compares it to his own situation of living in the back of his comic book store. In Season 6, he is invited to be part of the guys' group while Howard is in space. Sheldon is not very accepting of this due to Stuart's art degree (which he considers inferior), but relents after Stuart offers him a 30% off discount in the comic book store.
Character	Portrayed by	Seasons
1	2	3	4	5	6	7
Leonard Hofstadter	Johnny Galecki	Main
Sheldon Cooper	Jim Parsons	Main
Penny	Kaley Cuoco	Main
Howard Wolowitz	Simon Helberg	Main
Raj Koothrappali	Kunal Nayyar	Main
Leslie Winkle	Sara Gilbert	Recurring	Main	Guest	
Bernadette Rostenkowski-Wolowitz	Melissa Rauch		Recurring	Main
Amy Farrah Fowler	Mayim Bialik		Guest	Main
Stuart Bloom	Kevin Sussman		Recurring	Main	Recurring
Recurring themes and elements
Science
Much of the show focuses on science, particularly physics. The four main male characters are employed at Caltech and have science-related occupations, as do Bernadette and Amy. The characters frequently banter about scientific theories or news (notably around the start of the show), and make science-related jokes.

Science has also interfered with the characters' romantic lives. Leslie broke up with Leonard when he sided with Sheldon in his support for string theory rather than her support for loop quantum gravity.[53] When Leonard joined Sheldon, Raj, and Howard on a three-month Arctic research trip, it separated Leonard and Penny at a time their relationship was budding. When Bernadette took an interest in Leonard's work, it made both Penny and Howard envious and resulted in Howard confronting Leonard, and Penny asking Sheldon to teach her physics.[54] Sheldon and Amy also briefly ended their relationship after an argument over which of their fields was superior to the other's.[55]

David Saltzberg, who has a Ph.D. in physics, has served as science consultant for the show for six seasons and attends every taping.[56] While Saltzberg knows physics, he sometimes needs assistance from Mayim Bialik, who has a Ph.D. in neuroscience.[57] Saltzberg sees early versions of scripts which need scientific information added to them, and he also points out where the writers, despite their knowledge of science, have made a mistake. He is usually not needed during a taping unless a lot of science, and especially the whiteboard, is involved.[57]

Sci-fi, fantasy, comic book fandom and gaming
The four main male characters are all avid sci-fi, fantasy, and comic book fans and memorabilia collectors.

Star Trek in particular is frequently referenced and Sheldon identifies strongly with the character of Spock; when he is given a used napkin signed by Leonard Nimoy as a Christmas gift from Penny he is overwhelmed with excitement and gratitude ("I possess the DNA of Leonard Nimoy?!").[58] Star Trek: The Original Series cast member George Takei has made a cameo, and Leonard Nimoy made a cameo as the voice of Sheldon's vintage Mr. Spock action figure (both cameos were in dream sequences). Star Trek: The Next Generation cast members Brent Spiner and LeVar Burton have had cameos as themselves,[59][60] while Wil Wheaton has a recurring role as a fictionalized version of himself. All four male characters can speak Klingon to varying degrees—the opening of the episode "The Panty Piñata Polarization" shows them playing "Klingon Boggle". In the ending of the episode "The Launch Acceleration", Amy and Sheldon were seen playing doctor with Amy dressed in a Star Trek medical uniform.[61] In the episode "The Bakersfield Expedition", the four male leads dress up as Star Trek: The Next Generation characters for a Star Trek convention. When they return home, they hear the women discussing comic books. They believe that they have crossed into an alternate reality in which their girlfriends care for such things, and set their phasers to stun and investigate.

In addition to Star Trek, the group are also fans of Star Wars, Battlestar Galactica, and Doctor Who; numerous quotes from Star Wars are made and references to Battlestar Galactica can be seen in some episodes. In season two, Raj once likens Sheldon to C-3PO,[62] an intelligent, yet semi-annoying protocol droid in the Star Wars series. In episode 5 of season 2, Sheldon wants to return a set of white Star Wars sheets to Pottery Barn as they are too exciting for sleeping in.[63] In the episode "The Ornithophobia Diffusion", the nerds intend to watch Star Wars on Blu-ray, and Howard also exaggerates about George Lucas' controversial alterations to the films: "If we don't start soon, George Lucas is going to change it again.". In one episode, while talking post-coitus, Peny quotes Yoda to Leonard: "Do. Or do not. There is no try," thrilling Leonard. In 2009, Katee Sackhoff of Battlestar Galactica appeared as herself in "The Vengeance Formulation" as Howard's fantasy dream girl. She appears again in the season 4 episode "The Hot Troll Deviation", in the same role. Leonard likes Babylon 5, but Sheldon refuses to watch it, calling it derivative.[clarification needed][64][n 1] Sheldon also expresses a great liking of Joss Whedon's Firefly: he is shown to be quite upset with the Fox network for cancelling it and even incorporated the series into Roommate Agreement. As well as this, Sheldon demonstrates knowledge of the TV series Stargate SG1: in the episode "The Cushion Saturation", he explains that the team requires a 'tactical retreat' and attempts to use an episode of Stargate SG1 to demonstrate his idea.