The Walking Dead (TV series)
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


The Walking Dead

Genre	Post-apocalyptic
Zombie apocalypse
Horror
Format	Serial drama
Developed by	Frank Darabont
Starring	Andrew Lincoln
Jon Bernthal
Sarah Wayne Callies
Laurie Holden
Jeffrey DeMunn
Steven Yeun
Chandler Riggs
Norman Reedus
Lauren Cohan
Danai Gurira
Michael Rooker
David Morrissey
Composer(s)	Bear McCreary
Country of origin	United States
Language(s)	English
No. of seasons	3
No. of episodes	27 (List of episodes)
Production
Executive producer(s)	Frank Darabont
Gale Anne Hurd
David Alpert
Robert Kirkman
Charles H. Eglee
Glen Mazzara
Location(s)	Atlanta, Georgia
Cinematography	David Boyd
Rohn Schmidt
Running time	42–45 minutes
66 minutes (2 episodes)
Production company(s)	AMC Studios
Circle of Confusion
Darkwood Productions
Valhalla Motion Pictures
Distributor	AMC
Fox International Channels
Broadcast
Original channel	AMC
Audio format	Dolby Digital 5.1 (DVD)
Dolby TrueHD 5.1 (Blu-ray) Dolby TrueHD 7.1 (Blu-ray)
Original run	October 31, 2010 – present
External links
Website
The Walking Dead is an American television drama series developed by Frank Darabont. It is based on the comic book series of the same name by Robert Kirkman, Tony Moore, and Charlie Adlard. The series stars Andrew Lincoln as sheriff's deputy Rick Grimes, who awakens from a coma to find the world dominated by flesh-eating "walkers", resembling the zombies of George A. Romero's horror movies. He sets out to find his family and encounters many other survivors along the way.
The Walking Dead premiered on October 31, 2010 on the cable television channel AMC in the United States. It premiered internationally during the first week of November 2010 on Fox International Channels. Based on its reception, AMC renewed the series for a second season of 13 episodes, which premiered on October 16, 2011. Two episodes into the second season, AMC announced that the show would return for a third season, which began airing on October 14, 2012.
The series has been well received and has received many award nominations, including a Writers Guild of America Award nomination and a Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Television Series Drama. The series has also attained strong Nielsen ratings, beating various records for a cable series, including receiving 10.9 million viewers for its season three premiere to become the most-watched basic cable drama telecast in history.
Contents   
1 Series overview
1.1 Season 1 (2010)
1.2 Season 2 (2011–2012)
1.3 Season 3 (2012–2013)
2 Cast and characters
2.1 Main
2.2 Recurring
2.3 Darabont connections
3 Production
3.1 Development
3.2 Crew
3.3 Music
3.4 Filming
3.5 Marketing
3.6 Talking Dead
4 Release
5 Reception
5.1 Critical reception
5.2 Ratings
5.3 Awards and nominations
6 References
7 External links
Series overview

Main article: List of The Walking Dead episodes
Based on the comic book series of the same name, The Walking Dead tells the story of a small group of survivors living in the aftermath of a zombie apocalypse. Most of the story takes place in the Atlanta metropolitan area and then the surrounding countryside of northern Georgia, as the survivors search for a safe haven away from the shuffling hordes of predatory "walkers" (as the zombies are referred to in the show), who devour any living thing they catch, and whose bite is infectious to humans. The plot is focused primarily on the dilemmas the group faces as they struggle to balance their humanity with their survival against the zombie horde, and later, how they cope with members being killed and deal with other human survivors they encounter, many of whom are dangerous and predatory themselves.
The group is led by Rick Grimes, who was a sheriff's deputy before the zombie outbreak. At every turn they are faced with the horror of the walking zombies, the changing dynamic of their group, and hostility from the scattered remains of a struggling human populace who are focused on their own survival now that the structures of society have collapsed.
Season 1 (2010)
Main article: The Walking Dead (season 1)
The series begins with sheriff's deputy Rick Grimes waking up from a coma in an abandoned and badly damaged hospital. Leaving the hospital, Rick discovers a post-apocalyptic world overrun with zombies (or "walkers," as they are often referred to in-show). Rick also discovers his wife and son are missing. Acting on a rumor from a fellow survivor, he arms himself and begins a perilous journey to Atlanta, Georgia, where the CDC is said to have set up a quarantined safe-zone in the city. Upon reaching Atlanta, he soon discovers that the city is instead overrun by the walkers.
A few miles outside the city, Rick's wife Lori and son Carl have been hiding from the walkers with Shane Walsh, Rick's partner and best friend. They have established a camp with a small group of fellow survivors. After being rescued from Atlanta by members of the group and reunited with Lori and Carl, Rick assumes command with Shane. A band of walkers eventually attack the camp, leaving several survivors dead and the remainder to seek aid from the CDC.
In the CDC, all but one staff member, Dr. Edwin Jenner, have either fled or killed themselves. Dr. Jenner explains that his research into the infection has not yielded a cure, and that he has not been in contact with anyone for a long while. Lack of fuel for the emergency generators soon initiates the building's safety protocols, which will trigger an explosion designed to destroy the facility and prevent the escape of deadly diseases. Jenner and Jacqui, a member of Rick's group, decide to stay and end their struggle. Dr. Jenner whispers something into Rick's ear, and the group escapes just as the CDC is incinerated in the explosion.
Season 2 (2011–2012)
Main article: The Walking Dead (season 2)
The second season begins with Rick and his group of survivors escaping the CDC. They decide that Fort Benning will be their next destination. Along the way, they encounter a traffic jam of abandoned vehicles on Interstate 85. The group loots several vehicles, but are forced to hide under them as a large herd of walkers approaches. A walker chases Sophia out from her hiding spot and, with another walker, pursues her into the woods. Rick finds her but loses her again after drawing off the walkers. The remaining group deals with interpersonal relationships while various searches for Sophia are performed. Carl is accidentally shot by a hunter named Otis during the initial search. To get help for Carl, Otis leads Rick and Shane to a large, isolated farm owned by a veterinarian named Hershel Greene, then helps Shane look for medical supplies; after getting them, Shane hurts his leg and sacrifices Otis to the walkers so he can get away. The survivors then move to the farm while Carl recovers. Rick's group tries to co-exist alongside Hershel's family, but dangerous secrets and disagreements over leadership cause tensions to rise. Lori is revealed to be pregnant (the father is unknown), and Glenn builds a romantic relationship with Maggie, one of Hershel's daughters. Glenn also discovers that the barn is full of walkers, some of whom are Hershel's family members. After Shane releases the walkers to be exterminated, Sophia appears as one of them and Rick reluctantly shoots her.
Hershel disappears to grieve for his family and is found by Rick and Glenn drinking at a local tavern, where they meet two other survivors. The situation rapidly turns sour and Rick kills the two men in a gunfight. The dead men's group quickly finds and opens fire on Rick, Hershel, and Glenn at the bar. The noise attracts a large herd of walkers, and one of the attackers, Randall, is injured and left behind. Rick and the others take him back to the farm, where they realize that Randall is likely to reveal the farm's location to his former group. As Rick's group deliberates on what to do with him, Dale is fatally wounded by a walker, forcing Daryl to euthanize Dale. The group later conducts a search for Randall, whom Shane had secretly released and murdered in the woods. Daryl and Glenn find him — as a walker — and kill him. Daryl concludes that a broken neck was the cause of Randall's reanimation, as opposed to a walker's bite or scratch. Meanwhile, Shane and Rick confront each other — the former having planned the fake search so that he could murder Rick. Rick gets the upper hand and stabs Shane in the torso, killing him. Carl arrives just in time to see Shane revive as a walker, and shoots him down.
The gunshot attracts a large herd of other walkers, who quickly overrun the property; in the ensuing battle and escape, Jimmy and Patricia are devoured, and Andrea is left behind. Andrea survives on her own, and is later rescued by a hooded woman accompanied by chained, armless walkers. The remaining survivors regroup but are forced to make camp due to lack of gasoline. After hearing of Randall's fate, Rick finally reveals what Jenner whispered to him at the end of Season One: that every survivor is infected with the walker virus. As Rick's leadership is questioned by the group later that night, a large prison looms in a pan out of the final scene.
Season 3 (2012–2013)
Main article: The Walking Dead (season 3)
The third season begins several months after the group escaped the farm, with Lori far into her pregnancy. They stumble upon an overrun prison and begin to convert it into their new home. While searching the place for supplies, Hershel is bitten by a walker and Rick is forced to amputate his leg. They soon meet a new group of survivors, who are prison inmates. In exchange for food, they clear out a different cell block for where the inmates (most of whom end up killed) can reside away from Rick's group. A walker breakout then splits up the group. T-Dog is bitten in the struggle and sacrifices himself to save Carol. Lori goes into labor, and insists that Maggie perform an emergency Caesarean section to save the baby. The operation kills Lori, and Carl is forced to shoot her to prevent reanimation. After grieving over their losses, the baby is named Judith.
Meanwhile, Michonne and Andrea are taken to the town of Woodbury, a safe haven from the walkers. They meet the Governor, the town's leader, and learn that Merle Dixon - Daryl's older brother - has taken refuge there as well. Michonne is immediately suspicious of the Governor and the settlement and decides to leave, but Andrea refuses to go with her. Merle is ordered to hunt down Michonne — wounding her, and then capturing Maggie and Glenn while they are out scavenging. Michonne eventually arrives at the prison, then guides Rick, Daryl, and Oscar back to Woodbury on a rescue mission. The team saves the couple, but Oscar is killed and Daryl is captured. Michonne stays briefly and attempts to slay the Governor; only to kill his undead daughter Penny (whom the Governor had kept chained in a back room of his apartment) and stab him in the eye during a scuffle. In the aftermath, the Governor calls an assembly and publicly accuses Merle of treason, reuniting him with Daryl as the mob decides their fate.
Back at the prison, Carl meets another band of survivors — led by Tyreese — and allows them to take shelter.
Cast and characters

Main article: List of The Walking Dead (TV series) characters
Main
Actor	Character	Seasons
1	2	3
Andrew Lincoln	Rick Grimes	Main
Jon Bernthal	Shane Walsh	Main	Guest (Cameo)
Sarah Wayne Callies	Lori Grimes	Main
Laurie Holden	Andrea	Main
Jeffrey DeMunn	Dale Horvath	Main	
Steven Yeun	Glenn	Main
Chandler Riggs	Carl Grimes	Main
Norman Reedus	Daryl Dixon	Recurring	Main
Lauren Cohan	Maggie Greene		Recurring	Main
Danai Gurira	Michonne		Guest (Stand-in)	Main
Michael Rooker	Merle Dixon	Recurring	Guest	Main
David Morrissey	The Governor		Main
Recurring
Actor	Character	Seasons
1	2	3
Melissa McBride	Carol Peletier	Recurring
IronE Singleton	Theodore "T-Dog" Douglas	Recurring
Madison Lintz	Sophia Peletier	Recurring	
Emma Bell	Amy	Recurring		Voice only
Jeryl Prescott	Jacqui	Recurring		Voice only
Andrew Rothenberg	Jim	Recurring		Voice only
Adam Minarovich	Ed Peletier	Recurring	Guest	
Juan Gabriel Pareja	Morales	Recurring	
Scott Wilson	Hershel Greene		Recurring
Emily Kinney	Beth Greene		Recurring
Jane McNeill	Patricia		Recurring	
James Allen McCune	Jimmy		Recurring	
Michael Zegen	Randall		Recurring	
Lew Temple	Axel		Recurring
Vincent Ward	Oscar		Recurring
Dallas Roberts	Milton		Recurring
Chad Coleman	Tyreese		Recurring
Sonequa Martin-Green	Sasha		Recurring
Jose Pablo Cantillo	Caesar Martinez		Recurring
Darabont connections
The series features several actors whom Walking Dead developer Frank Darabont has worked with previously, including Laurie Holden, Jeffrey DeMunn, Melissa McBride, Sam Witwer and Juan Gabriel Pareja. All five appeared in his 2007 film The Mist, along with Thomas Jane, who originally was set to star in the series when it was pitched to HBO. He was later in talks with Darabont to possibly guest star on the series as of fall 2010, but with Darabont's departure, it is unknown whether the guest spot will happen or not. Laurie Holden also appeared in the 2001 film The Majestic (as Adele Stanton, Jim Carrey's character's love interest), which Darabont directed. DeMunn has also appeared in several of Darabont's films; in addition to The Mist and The Majestic, he appeared in The Shawshank Redemption (1994) and The Green Mile (1999). Samuel Witwer (Private Jessup in Darabont's The Mist) appeared near the end of the pilot episode as a dead soldier in the tank where Rick hides. It was planned that Witwer would reprise his role in the original conception of the season two premiere.
Production

Development


Walking Dead creator Robert Kirkman signing a poster for the series at the 2011 New York Comic Con.
On January 20, 2010, AMC officially announced that it had ordered a pilot for a possible series adapted from The Walking Dead comic book series, with Frank Darabont and Gale Anne Hurd acting as executive producers and Darabont writing and directing. The entire series was pre-ordered based just on the strength of the source material, the television scripts, and Darabont's involvement. In January 2010 a review of the pilot episode's script attracted further attention. The pilot began filming in Atlanta, Georgia on May 15, 2010 after AMC had officially ordered a six episode first season. The series' remaining episodes began filming on June 2, 2010 with Darabont serving as showrunner. On August 31, 2010, Darabont reported that The Walking Dead had been picked up for a second season, with production to begin in February 2011. On November 8, 2010, AMC confirmed that there would be a second season consisting of 13 episodes. He would also like to include some of the "environmental elements" that take place during Volume 2 of Kirkman's book.
On October 25, 2011, AMC announced that it ordered a third season of The Walking Dead, saying, "Season two continues to deliver the strongest telecasts for any drama in basic cable history."
Crew
The first season writing staff consisted of series developer and executive producer Frank Darabont, who wrote/co-wrote four of the six episodes; executive producer Charles H. Eglee; executive producer and creator of the comic book, Robert Kirkman; co-executive producer Jack LoGiudice; consulting producer Adam Fierro; and Glen Mazzara; who all contributed to one episode each. Along with Darabont, who directed the pilot episode, the remaining five were directed by Michelle MacLaren, Gwyneth Horder-Payton, Johan Renck, Ernest Dickerson, and Guy Ferland.
On December 1, 2010, Deadline.com reported that Darabont had fired his writing staff, including executive producer Charles "Chic" Eglee, and planned to use freelance writers for the second season. Kirkman called the announcement "premature" and clarified that Eglee left to pursue other projects when Darabont decided to stay on as showrunner and that no definitive plans had been made regarding the writing staff for season two.
[Chic Eglee] was brought onto The Walking Dead with the idea that Frank was going to work on the first season and then go off and do movies [...] Chic didn't want to be second-in-command on a show when he's used to being a top dog, and so he decided to go off and do something else, which is something that happens and is not a big deal.
—Robert Kirkman, TV Guide
On December 3, 2010, in an interview with Entertainment Weekly, executive producer Gale Anne Hurd commented that "It's completely inaccurate. [In] the writers' room, there are people that have set up other projects that will be their first priority if their own series is picked up as a pilot or if it's a series. I think [Eglee] just decided that he wants to run his own show." She revealed that it would be likely for the show to return in October 2011, as Darabont and Kirkman planned on mapping out the next season early in 2011. She also confirmed that "every one of the principal cast is signed up for multiple seasons." In July 2011, series developer and showrunner Frank Darabont stepped down from his position as showrunner for the series. It was believed that he was unable to adjust to the schedule of running a television series. However, The Hollywood Reporter reported he had been fired over disputes over planned budget cuts and executive meddling. Executive producer Glen Mazzara was then appointed the new showrunner. New writers joined the writing staff in the second season, including co-executive producer Evan Reilly, producer Scott M. Gimple, and story editor Angela Kang.
Music
Bear McCreary was hired to compose the score for the series. McCreary stated that the main theme was based on his viewing of production designs for the opening title sequence. Instead of doing a full theme song as with his earlier works, McCreary chose to use a simple, repeating motif from the strings section.
It repeats over and over, and in fact in the pilot episode, you start hearing it before the main title begins, and this is something that continues episode to episode. You hear the main title music before the main title begins, so you know it's coming. That, to me, was the little hook – that little thing that, whenever you hear it, it takes you to the series.
—Bear McCreary
Filming


Booth at the 2010 Comic-Con with a scene from the pilot for the promotion of the series.
The Walking Dead is mostly filmed in Georgia. The series is completely shot on 16 mm film. David Tattersall was the director of photography for the pilot episode with David Boyd as the director of photography on the remainder of the episodes. Production design is done by Greg Melton and Alex Hajdu. The effects team includes veteran special effects makeup designer Gregory Nicotero, special effects coordinator Darrell Pritchett, and visual effects supervisors Sam Nicholson and Jason Sperling.
Marketing


Promotional poster of The Walking Dead.
The Walking Dead debuted during the same week in 120 countries. As part of an expansive campaign to advertise and heighten anticipation for the premiere, AMC and FOX International Channels coordinated a worldwide zombie invasion event on October 26, 2010. The stunt involved invading 26 major cities, starting with Taipei and Hong Kong, and ending in Los Angeles for the U.S. premiere, within a 24 hour period.
The show's official website released, just prior to the 2010 San Diego Comic-Con International, a motion comic based on Issue No. 1 of the original comic and voiced by Phil LaMarr. The site also posted a making-of documentary primarily about the first episode, as well as a number of other behind-the-scenes videos and interviews. In the documentary, comic series creator and show executive producer Robert Kirkman as well as artist Charlie Adlard say they are pleased with how faithful the show is to the comic and remark on the similarities between the actors and the comic's original character drawings.
Action figures of characters from the series, including Rick Grimes, Daryl Dixon and a zombie Walker and Biter, were created for release in November 2011. The figures, which are manufactured by McFarlane Toys, are designed to resemble the actors on the series. Figures created to resemble the characters as drawn in the comic book were released in September 2011.
Talking Dead
Main article: Talking Dead
Following the encore presentation of the second season premiere on October 16, 2011, a live after-show titled Talking Dead premiered, featuring host Chris Hardwick discussing the latest episode with fans, actors, and producers of the show.
Release



Sarah Wayne Callies and Andrew Lincoln in 2010. Robert Kirkman is in the background at left.
Scenes from the pilot were screened July 23, 2010 as part of the 2010 San Diego Comic-Con International. It premiered on AMC on October 31, 2010. It premiered internationally on Fox International Channels during the first week of November. The first season premiered in Hong Kong on TVB Pearl on August 30, 2011. Almost two weeks before the official premiere on AMC, the pilot episode leaked online. International broadcast rights for the show were sold and announced on June 14, 2010.
The season 1 DVD and Blu-ray was released on March 8, 2011. A three-disc special edition of the first season—featuring new featurettes and audio commentaries—was released on DVD and Blu-ray on October 4, 2011. The European versions of the first season DVD and Blu-ray are edited for gore, with cuts to episode two ("Guts"), episode three ("Tell It to the Frogs"), episode four ("Vatos") and episode five ("Wildfire").
Reception

Critical reception
The first season was reviewed positively by critics, receiving a score of 82 out of 100 on Metacritic (based on 25 reviews), indicating "universal acclaim". Heather Havrilesky of Salon.com included the show on their list of 9 new TV shows not to miss, giving it a grade of "A", with the author saying, "A film-quality drama series about zombies? Somebody pinch me!"
The second season received generally positive reviews with a score of 80 out of 100 based on 22 reviews on Metacritic. Some critics have been less than enthused with the second season, such as Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly, who now describes the series as "a nighttime soap with occasional appearances by deceased but moving, flesh-rotting, flesh-eating cameo monsters. [...] Every week, it seemed, a passel of folks went out and rooted around for awhile, came back to camp, and everyone lives off the fat of Hershel's land until it was time to go out and search for Sophia again. Occasionally someone reminded Rick they're supposed to be headed for Fort Benning and he gets all huffy about not leaving any child behind. It became a parody of a Samuel Beckett play." Nate Rawlings of Time's online entertainment section noted that "the pace during the first half of this season has been brutally slow. Changes in pace would be fine if the writers had used that time well, which they have not. They've tried to develop individual characters, but each subplot meant to add a layer to a character has been quickly resolved." Other critics such as Scott Wampler of Collider.com recognised the mediocre first half of the season claiming that "there seemed to be a helluva lot of water-treading." However Wampler also distinguished the increased quality of the second half saying "The second-half of the season, on the other hand, seemed far more intense, more interesting, better written."
The third season is currently being reviewed positively by critics, receiving a score of 82 out of 100 on Metacritic, based on 18 reviews. Verne Gay of Newsday claims that season 3 "doesn't disappoint" going on to say that there are "spots where you will yell out at the screen, 'Oh, my God, that just didn't happen.' Yes, the new season is that good", concluding his review by giving the season an A+ rating.
Ratings
Season	Timeslot (ET)	Episodes	Premiered	Ended	Average viewers
(in millions)
Date	Premiere viewers
(in millions)	Date	Finale viewers
(in millions)
Season 1	Sunday 10:00 pm	6	October 31, 2010	5.35	December 5, 2010	5.97	5.24
Season 2	Sunday 9:00 pm	13	October 16, 2011	7.26	March 18, 2012	8.99	6.90
Season 3	Sunday 9:00 pm	16	October 14, 2012	10.87	March 31, 2013	N/A	N/A
Awards and nominations
Main article: List of awards and nominations received by The Walking Dead
The Walking Dead was nominated for Best New Series for the 2011 Writers Guild of America Awards. It was nominated for Best Television Series Drama at the 68th Golden Globe Awards. It was also named during the American Film Institute Awards 2010 as one of the top 10 television programs of 2010. For the 2011 Saturn Awards, the series received six nominations—for Best Television Presentation, Andrew Lincoln for Best Actor in Television, Sarah Wayne Callies for Best Actress on Television, Steven Yeun for Best Supporting Actor in Television, Laurie Holden for Best Supporting Actress in Television, and Noah Emmerich for Best Guest Starring Role in Television. The series was nominated for Best Drama Series at the inaugural 1st Critics' Choice Television Awards. The pilot episode "Days Gone Bye" received three nominations for the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards—it was nominated for Outstanding Sound Editing for a Series and Outstanding Special Visual Effects for a Series and won for Outstanding Prosthetic Makeup for a Series, Miniseries, Movie or a Special.