Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban
Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban poster.png
US theatrical release poster
Directed by	Alfonso Cuarón
Produced by	Chris Columbus
David Heyman
Mark Radcliffe
Screenplay by	Steve Kloves
Based on	Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban 
by J. K. Rowling
Starring	Daniel Radcliffe
Rupert Grint
Emma Watson
Music by	John Williams
Cinematography	Michael Seresin
Edited by	Steven Weisberg
Production
  company	Heyday Films
1492 Pictures
Distributed by	Warner Bros. Pictures
Release date(s)	
23 May 2004 (New York City)
31 May 2004 (United Kingdom)
4 June 2004 (United States)
Running time	142 minutes
Country	United Kingdom
United States
Language	English
Budget	$130 million
Box office	$796,688,549[1]

Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban is a 2004 fantasy film directed by Alfonso Cuarón and distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures.[1] It is based on the novel of the same name by J. K. Rowling. The film, which is the third instalment in the Harry Potter film series, was written by Steve Kloves and produced by Chris Columbus (director of the first two instalments), David Heyman, and Mark Radcliffe. The story follows Harry Potter's third year at Hogwarts as he is informed that a prisoner named Sirius Black has escaped from Azkaban and wants to murder him. The film stars Daniel Radcliffe as Harry Potter, alongside Rupert Grint and Emma Watson as Harry's best friends Ron Weasley and Hermione Granger. It is the sequel to Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets and is followed by Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire.

The film was released on 31 May 2004 in the United Kingdom and on 4 June 2004 in North America, as the first Harry Potter film released into IMAX theatres and to be using IMAX Technology. It is also the last Harry Potter film to be released on VHS as well as the last film until Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince to be rated PG in North America. The film was nominated for two Academy Awards—Original Music Score and Visual Effects—at the 77th Academy Awards in 2005.

Prisoner of Azkaban grossed a total of $796.6 million worldwide,[1] with its box office performance ranking as the lowest-grossing in the series. However, it was, at the time, the most highly acclaimed film of the series, and is widely considered by critics and fans to be the best installment of the franchise.[2][3][4]

Plot[edit]
Further information: Plot of the novel
13-year-old Harry Potter has been spending another miserable summer at Privet Drive. When Uncle Vernon's sister, Marge, insults Harry's parents, he loses his temper and accidentally causes her to inflate and fly away. Harry flees with his luggage, fed up with his life with the Dursleys. The Knight Bus delivers Harry to the Leaky Cauldron, where Harry is let off the hook by Minister of Magic Cornelius Fudge for the use of magic outside Hogwarts. After reuniting with Ron and Hermione, Harry learns that Sirius Black, a convicted supporter of Voldemort, has escaped Azkaban prison, intending to kill Harry.

The trio return to Hogwarts on the Hogwarts Express. Dementors board the train during the journey, searching for Sirius, and enters the trio's compartment, prompting Harry to pass out. New Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher Professor Lupin repels the Dementor with a Patronus Charm. At Hogwarts, Albus Dumbledore announces that dementors will be guarding the school while Sirius is at large. Hagrid is announced the new Care of Magical Creatures teacher. Hagrid's first class goes awry when Draco Malfoy deliberately provokes the hippogriff, Buckbeak, who attacks him (although it was kind to Harry). Draco's father Lucius Malfoy has Buckbeak sentenced to death.

Sirius is rumoured to have entered the castle but isn't found. During a stormy Quidditch match, dementors overpower Harry, causing him to fall off his broomstick, which is then destroyed by the Whomping Willow. Professor Lupin secretly teaches Harry to defend himself against dementors, using the Patronus charm. At Hogsmeade, a shocked Harry learns that Sirius is his godfather and was his parents' best friend. Sirius was accused of betraying the Potters' hiding location to Voldemort and murdering their mutual friend Peter Pettigrew.

The trio visit Hagrid to console him over Buckbeak's impending execution. When Ron's pet rat Scabbers escapes, a large dog appears and drags both Ron and Scabbers into a hole at the Whomping Willow's base, which is actually an underground passage to the Shrieking Shack. The trio discovers that the dog is actually Sirius, who is an Animagus. Professor Lupin arrives and embraces Sirius as an old friend. Professor Lupin admits to being a werewolf, and explains that Sirius is innocent. Much to Ron's surprise, Scabbers is actually Pettigrew, an Animagus who committed the crime for which Sirius was convicted. After he was forced back into a human, Professor Lupin and Sirius prepare to kill Pettigrew, but Harry intervenes; Pettigrew is instead to be turned over to the Dementors.

The full moon rises; Professor Lupin transforms into a werewolf, he and Sirius fight in the animal forms, and Pettigrew escapes in his rat form. Sirius and Harry are attacked by dementors. Harry sees a figure save them by casting a powerful stag Patronus. He believes the mysterious figure is his dead father, and passes out, awakening to discover that Sirius has been captured and sentenced to the Dementor's Kiss. Acting on Dumbledore's advice, Harry and Hermione travel back in time, watching themselves repeat the night's events. They save Buckbeak and witness the Dementors overpower Sirius and Harry. The present Harry realises that he himself was the one to cast the Patronus, not his father, and rushes to do so. Harry and Hermione then rescue Sirius, who escapes on Buckbeak. Professor Lupin resigns, as parents will object to a werewolf teaching their children. Sirius sends Harry a Firebolt broom, and Harry happily takes it for a ride.

Cast[edit]
Further information: List of Harry Potter cast members
Daniel Radcliffe as Harry Potter
Rupert Grint as Ron Weasley, Harry's best friend.
Emma Watson as Hermione Granger, Harry's other best friend.
Robbie Coltrane as Rubeus Hagrid, the Hogwarts gamekeeper and the new Care of Magical Creatures teacher.
Michael Gambon as Albus Dumbledore, the Hogwarts Headmaster. Gambon assumed the role after Richard Harris, who played Dumbledore in the previous two films, died on 25 October 2002.[5] Despite his illness, Harris was determined to film his part, telling a visiting David Heyman not to recast the role.[6] Four months after Harris's death, Cuarón chose Gambon as his replacement.[6][7] Gambon was unconcerned with bettering or copying Harris, instead giving his own interpretation, putting on a slight Irish accent for the role,[8] as well as completing his scenes in three weeks.[9] Rumours of Ian McKellen being offered the role started to spread, but when confronted, he turned the rumours down, stating that he has played a similar character in Gandalf of The Lord of the Rings trilogy. He also stated it would have been inappropriate to take Harris' role, as the late actor had called McKellen a "dreadful" actor.[10][11] Harris's family had expressed an interest in seeing Harris's close friend Peter O'Toole being chosen as his replacement.[12]
Richard Griffiths as Vernon Dursley, Harry's Muggle uncle.
Gary Oldman as Sirius Black, an escapee from the Wizarding prison Azkaban and Harry's godfather. Oldman accepted the part because he needed the money, as he had not taken on any major work in several years as he had decided to spend more time with his children.[13] He drew inspiration from Cuarón, whom he described as having "such enthusiasm and a joy for life,"[14] and compared Sirius to John Lennon.[13] He was "surprised by how difficult it was to pull off", comparing the role to Shakespearean dialogue.[14] Oldman suggested Sirius's hairstyle, while Cuarón designed his tattoos.[14] He had read the first book, and his children were fans of the series. The part made Oldman a hero with his children and their schoolmates.[8]
Alan Rickman as Severus Snape, the Potions master at Hogwarts.
Fiona Shaw as Petunia Dursley, Harry's Muggle aunt.
Maggie Smith as Minerva McGonagall, the Transfiguration teacher at Hogwarts.
Timothy Spall as Peter Pettigrew, a friend of Harry's parents said to have been killed by Sirius Black.
David Thewlis as Professor Lupin, the new Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher at Hogwarts. Thewlis, who had previously auditioned for the role of Quirrell in Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone, was Cuarón's first choice for the role of Professor Lupin. He accepted the role on advice from Ian Hart, the man who was cast as Quirrell, who told him that Professor Lupin was "the best part in the book."[15] Cuarón told Thewlis that he thought Lupin was gay, pitching him as a "gay junkie", although his idea turned out to be incorrect.[16] Thewlis had seen the first two films and had only read part of the first book, although after taking the role he read the third. He was excited about the prospect of making a children's film, and thoroughly enjoyed filming.[8]
Emma Thompson as Sybill Trelawney, the Divination teacher at Hogwarts.
Julie Walters as Molly Weasley, the Weasley matriarch and a mother figure to Harry.
Production[edit]
Development[edit]
With Prisoner of Azkaban, production of the Harry Potter films switched to an eighteen-month cycle, which producer David Heyman explained was "to give each [film] the time it required."[6] Chris Columbus, the director of the previous two films, decided not to return and helm the third instalment as he "hadn't seen [his] own kids for supper in the week for about two and a half years."[17] Even so, he remained on as a producer alongside Heyman.[18] Guillermo del Toro was approached to direct, but considered the film "so bright and happy and full of light, that [he] wasn't interested."[19] Marc Forster turned down the film because he had made Finding Neverland and did not want to direct child actors again. Warner Bros. then composed a three-name short list for Columbus's replacement, which comprised Callie Khouri, Kenneth Branagh (who played Gilderoy Lockhart in Chamber of Secrets) and eventual selection Alfonso Cuarón.[20] Cuarón was initially nervous about accepting as he had not read any of the books, or seen the films. After reading the series, he changed his mind and signed on to direct,[21] as he had immediately connected to the story.[18] Cuarón's appointment pleased J. K. Rowling who loved his film Y Tu Mamá También and was impressed with his adaptation of A Little Princess.[22] Heyman found that "tonally and stylistically, [Cuarón] was the perfect fit."[6] As his first exercise with the actors who portray the central trio, Cuarón assigned Radcliffe, Grint and Watson to write an autobiographical essay about their character, written in the first person, spanning birth to the discovery of the magical world, and including the character's emotional experience. Of Rupert Grint's essay, Cuarón recalls, "Rupert didn't deliver the essay. When I questioned why he didn't do it, he said, 'I'm Ron; Ron wouldn't do it.' So I said, 'Okay, you do understand your character.' That was the most important piece of acting work that we did on Prisoner of Azkaban, because it was very clear that everything they put in those essays was going to be the pillars they were going to hold on to for the rest of the process."[8][23]

Filming[edit]


Loch Shiel, where scenes from Prisoner of Azkaban were filmed.
Principal photography began on 24 February 2003,[7] at Leavesden Film Studios, and concluded in October 2003.[24]

Some sets for the film were built in Glen Coe, Scotland, near the Clachaig Inn. The indoor sets, including ones built for the previous two films, are mainly in Leavesden Film Studios. The Hogwarts Lake was filmed from Loch Shiel, Loch Eilt and Loch Morar in the Scottish Highlands. Incidentally, the train bridge, which was also featured in the Chamber of Secrets, is opposite Loch Shiel and was used to film the sequences when the Dementor boarded the train. A small section of the triple-decker bus scene, where it weaves in between traffic, was filmed in North London's Palmers Green. Some parts were also filmed in and around Borough Market and Lambeth Bridge in London.

The Honeydukes set in this film is a redress of the set of Flourish & Blotts that was seen in Chamber of Secrets, which, in turn, was a redress of the Ollivanders set from the first film.

Rowling allowed Cuarón to make minor changes to the book, on the condition that he stuck to the book's spirit.[21] She allowed him to place a sundial on Hogwarts' grounds, but rejected a graveyard, as that would play an important part in the then unreleased sixth book.[21] Rowling said she "got goosebumps" when she saw several moments in the film, as they inadvertently referred to events in the final two books, she stated "people are going to look back on the film and think that those were put in deliberately as clues."[22] When filming concluded, Cuarón found that it had "been the two sweetest years of my life," and expressed his interest in directing one of the sequels.[21]

Effects[edit]
Cuarón originally wanted to move away from CGI toward puppetry. He hired master underwater puppeteer Basil Twist to help, using puppets to study the potential movement of the Dementors.[6] Once it became apparent that puppetry would be too expensive and unable to portray the specific elements of the Dementors, Cuarón turned to CGI; however, he and his team did use footage of Dementor puppets underwater as a basis for the flowing movements of the computer-generated Dementors.

The Knight Bus segment when Harry is being taken to The Leaky Cauldron uses the technique known as bullet time, popularised in The Matrix series of films. This segment takes humorous advantage of the magic quality of the Harry Potter world by having the Muggle world go into bullet time while inside the Knight Bus, Harry, Stan Shunpike and Ernie Prang (and the talking shrunken head) keep moving in real time.