The IT Crowd
The IT Crowd title card.jpg
Genre	Sitcom
Created by	Graham Linehan
Starring	Chris O'Dowd
Richard Ayoade
Katherine Parkinson
Matt Berry
Theme music composer	Neil Hannon
Country of origin	United Kingdom
Original language(s)	English
No. of series	4 (+ 1 special)
No. of episodes	25 (List of episodes)
Production
Executive producer(s)	Ash Atalla (2006–2008)
Producer(s)	Retort (part of FremantleMedia UK, previously Talkback Thames)
Editor(s)	Paul Machliss
Camera setup	Multi-camera
Running time	24 minutes (special approx 47 minutes)
Distributor	FremantleMedia
Broadcast
Original channel	Channel 4
Picture format	576i (16:9 SDTV) (2006–10)
1080i (HDTV) (2013)
Audio format	Stereo
Original run	3 February 2006 – 27 September 2013

The IT Crowd is a British sitcom by Channel 4, written by Graham Linehan, produced by Ash Atalla and starring Chris O'Dowd, Richard Ayoade, Katherine Parkinson and Matt Berry. The "IT" in the show's title can be pronounced as either the word it /ˈɪt/, as in "the 'it' crowd", or as the letters IT /ˌaɪˈtiː/, as in the abbreviation for information technology.[1]

Set in the London offices of the fictional Reynholm Industries, the show revolves around the three staff members of its IT department: a geeky genius named Maurice Moss (Ayoade), the work-shy Roy Trenneman (O'Dowd), and Jen Barber (Parkinson), the department head/relationship manager, who knows nothing about IT. The show also focuses on the bosses of Reynholm Industries: Denholm Reynholm (Chris Morris) and later, his son Douglas (Matt Berry).

The comedy premiered on Channel 4 on 3 February 2006, and ran for four series of six episodes each. Although a fifth series was commissioned,[2] the programme was concluded with a special, one-off episode, aired on 27 September 2013.[3][4][5][6]

The show was the third successful sitcom creation of Graham Linehan, following Father Ted (co-written with Arthur Mathews) and Black Books (co-written with Dylan Moran).

Plot[edit]
The IT Crowd is set in the offices of Reynholm Industries, a fictional British corporation in central London, located at 123 Carenden Road. It focuses on the shenanigans of the three-strong IT support team located in a dingy, untidy, and unkempt basement – a great contrast to the shining modern architecture and stunning London views enjoyed by the rest of the organisation. The obscurity surrounding what the company does serves as a running gag throughout the series – all that is known is that the company bought and sold ITV (a fact which Denholm Reynholm forgot completely), and once made part-year profits of "eighteen hundred billion billion". However, it is hinted that Reynholm Industries is a communications corporation, as Denholm Reynholm once claimed that the company, through buying mobile phone carriers and television stations, had created the largest communications empire in Great Britain. Douglas Reynholm claims his father Denholm Reynholm described the IT department as being run by "a dynamic go-getter, a genius and a man from Ireland".[7]

Moss and Roy, the two technicians, are portrayed as socially inept geeks or, in Denholm Reynholm's words, "standard nerds". Despite the company's dependence on their services, they are despised, ignored, and considered losers by the rest of the staff. Roy's exasperation is reflected in his support techniques of ignoring the phone in the hope it will stop ringing, and using reel-to-reel tape recordings of stock IT suggestions ("Have you tried turning it off and on again?" and "Is it definitely plugged in?"). He expresses his personality by wearing a different geek T-shirt in each episode.[8] Moss's wide and intricate knowledge of all things technical is reflected in his extremely accurate yet utterly indecipherable suggestions, while he demonstrates a complete inability to deal with practical problems like extinguishing fires and removing spiders. Moss is completely unable to deal with others in a rational manner, often citing bizarre facts about himself or technology, and is occasionally arrogant around others when it comes to computers.

Jen, the newest member of the team, is hopelessly non-technical, despite claiming on her CV that she has "a lot of experience with computers". As Denholm, the company boss, is equally tech-illiterate, he is convinced by Jen's interview bluffing and appoints her head of the IT department. Her official title is "relationship manager", yet her attempts at bridging the gulf between the technicians and the business generally have the opposite effect, landing Jen in situations just as ludicrous as those of her team-mates.

Series 1[edit]
The first series of The IT Crowd features the entry of Jen, and how geeks such as Roy and Moss can build up a relationship with someone hopelessly computer-illiterate like Jen.

Series 2[edit]
Throughout the second series, Moss and Roy make an attempt at becoming more social by trying to make new friends. Meanwhile Jen has trouble with the new head of Reynholm Industries, Douglas Reynholm.

Series 3[edit]
Roy gets himself into more awkward situations with football fans, builders and general nerds. Jen shows how tech-illiterate she is to an even further extent, while Moss very briefly loses some of his computer skills and, on top of that, there are run-ins with bank robbers.

Series 4[edit]
The most recent series generally concentrates on the IT Department's interactions amongst themselves, and their relationship with outsiders: Roy's break-up from a long-term relationship, Moss's combat with his inner rebel, Jen's relationship with a new boyfriend, and Douglas's acceptance of the "loss" of his wife.

2013 special[edit]
"The Internet Is Coming" (sometimes incorrectly referred to as "The Last Byte"),[9][10][11] the final episode of The IT Crowd, aired as a one-off special on 27 September 2013.[3] Production began in 2011, and filming finished in July 2013. Chris O'Dowd (Roy) had this to say after filming the finale: "It was lovely to say hello to the characters again – but also to say goodbye to them. I think we've probably done it now and I'd be surprised if we did any more."[12]

The IT Crowd Night[edit]
On Christmas Eve 2013, Channel 4 aired a special IT Crowd Night. It featured Katherine Parkinson as her character Jen Barber, now acting manager at Reynholm Industries, introducing the segments of the IT Crowd Night as part of a "corporate webisode". The night started at 9PM with the special "The Internet is Coming". After that, the IT Crowd Manual aired. It is a behind-the-scenes documentary narrated by Stephen Mangan, featuring interviews with the main cast, and various other guest stars who appeared on the show, in the form of a manual, with each subject of the series (characters, studio, audience) having its own chapter. The night featured two favourite episodes: the fans' favourite was "The Work Outing",[13] and series creator Graham Linehan's favourite was "The Final Countdown".[14]

Cast and characters[edit]


Jen, Moss, and Roy
Main article: List of The IT Crowd characters
Chris O'Dowd as Roy Trenneman – a laid-back IT technician from Ireland, Roy is often shown to go to great lengths to fob off workmates so he can sit around doing nothing. However, when something does happen, he is always the one who gets the wrong end of the stick and is constantly either injured or in distress.
Richard Ayoade as Maurice Moss – highly intelligent with a lack of social skills, Moss struggles to communicate with anything that does not have a keyboard. Moss lives at home with his mother, who also dresses him and packs him lunch.
Katherine Parkinson as Jen Barber – after claiming she has had "a lot of experience with computers" Jen is made head of Reynholm Industries IT department, where she is soon proven by Roy and Moss to in fact have no knowledge of IT at all. However, she finds her niche by working as the Relationship Manager between IT and the rest of Reynholm Industries. Jen frequently lies in attempts to get ahead in her professional and personal life, usually with disastrous results.
Matt Berry as Douglas Reynholm (series 2 recurring, 3 & 4 main cast) – the son of Denholm "that fled from a hefty lawsuit to go off womanising all over the world" using his father's cash, Douglas inherits Reynholm Industries. At the end of series 4, he is taken to court by his apparently 'dead' wife, Victoria. There is quite an argument, but in the end she sues him for a large amount of money.
Chris Morris as Denholm Reynholm (series 1 & 2 recurring, series 3 'From Hell') – the founder of Reynholm Industries, Denholm has very little understanding of IT. In series 2 Denholm is informed by the police of a problem with the company's pension accounts, leading him to commit suicide by walking out of a high storey window. He appears once in series 3 when Douglas sees him briefly in the afterlife.
Noel Fielding as Richmond Avenal (series 1 & 2 recurring, series 4 one episode, "The Internet is Coming" ) – once a young go-getter at Reynholm Industries, Richmond was the right-hand-man to Denholm, before finding Cradle of Filth and becoming a goth – leading to his downfall as a successful businessman. As a result he ends up confined to the server room in the basement, next to the IT department. Richmond did not appear in Series 3 due to Noel Fielding's busy schedule. Richmond was said by Moss to have scurvy. In the fourth series' final episode, Richmond features once more in a guest appearance, where it is revealed that after he caught scurvy he decided that he didn't want to be a goth after all, and instead began running a successful business called "Goth2Boss" to encourage goths to cheer up and make good use of their lives.[15]
Cultural references[edit]

This section possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (January 2011)


One of the Series 1 DVD menus in the style of isometric adventure games such as Knight Lore and Head Over Heels
The show adds a large number of references to geek culture and professionalism, mostly in set dressing and props. Dialogue (both technical and cultural) is usually authentic and any technobabble used often contains in-jokes for viewers knowledgeable in such subjects. Roy regularly wears shirts that feature abbreviations, such as OMFG and RTFM. Series 3 Episode 1 has Roy wearing the Music Elitism Venn Diagram tee and I Screw Robots sticker from the webcomic Diesel Sweeties.[16] On occasion, there will be movie-style scenes that parody fight scenes and melodrama.

In August 2008, unable to provide the props himself, Linehan appealed to fans to donate items to use for series 3, to make the set look like "a geek's Shangri-La".[17] The Centre for Computing History loaned a collection of computers from the 1970s and 1980s. They included an Altair 8800, Oric Atmos, Amstrad CPC 464, Sinclair ZX81, Sinclair ZX Spectrum +2, Commodore 64, Commodore PET, Atari ST, Sord M5, Acorn RISC PC600, BBC Model B, an Astro Wars game, circuit boards from a Wang VS mainframe and several shelves of old computer manuals. A Map Overlay and Statistical System (MOSS) manual, with the letters M-O-S-S on the spine, sits on the shelf behind Moss.

Many items on the set reflect Linehan's own personal taste. There are numerous examples of this, but most noticeable are the V for Vendetta (Guy Fawkes) mask, the Flying Spaghetti Monster, various xkcd references, such as the "Map of Online Communities"[18] poster and the "Actual Size!" sticker on Moss's computer, the Buddy Bradley doll, the Robert Pollard and Guided by Voices posters (Guided by Voices is one of Linehan's favourite bands, cropping up in background music, on t-shirts and getting a specific mention in series 3, episode 3), a poster of the album The Campfire Headphase by Boards of Canada and the War on Terror board game, which is played by Moss and Roy in series 2, episode 4. The main stickers found around the office include the Electronic Frontier Foundation ("Fair Use has a POSSE", "MP3 is not a crime", "Coding is not a crime")[19] and the Open Rights Group. In the fourth series, some Ubuntu stickers were added, including one on Moss's monitor, Jen's office door, the mirror and the department's door.

Production[edit]
Linehan wrote the entire series alone. The show was filmed before a live studio audience, which at the time was considered by some as risky, with the format thought to have been surpassed by more fly-on-the-wall type presentations.[20] This was a deliberate choice by Linehan, who sought to challenge the current vogue for hailing the "death of the sitcom", stating "I trust my instincts, so I'm going to do it my way and hope people come to me".[20] The first series was recorded in front of a live audience at Teddington Studios but moved to Pinewood Studios for series 2 onwards, with some additional location footage. Cinematic-style footage were also recorded before live tapings.

The title sequence of the show was produced by Shynola.[21]

Episodes[edit]
Main article: List of The IT Crowd episodes
All four series have run for 6 episodes each. The first series premiered on 3 February 2006, the second on 24 August 2007, the third on 21 November 2008 and the fourth on 25 June 2010.[22]

In a first for Channel 4, each episode of the first series was available for download from the station's web site for the seven days preceding its initial television broadcast. Downloads were only available for UK and Ireland viewers and were supplied in Windows Media Video format. All but the first two episodes were encoded with DRM restrictions.

The opening episode of series 4 was released by Channel 4's online service 4oD a week before the television broadcast, though in order to protect the programme this was only available to registered and logged-in viewers, whereas much of 4oD's post-broadcast output is freely available.

A fifth series had been commissioned for 2011.[23] In May 2011 Graham Linehan was quoted as saying that he intended the fifth series to be the last as he wanted "one more series to really say goodbye to the characters and the fans" and did not want it to become "a zombie series where the show is dead but its body is still moving around."[24]

In May 2013, Linehan confirmed that a 1-episode finale would begin filming in a few weeks.[4]

In July 2013, actor Chris O'Dowd confirmed that the finale special had been filmed in late June.[25] It was broadcast on 27 September 2013 on Channel 4.

Distribution[edit]
International syndication[edit]
The show is broadcast internationally. In Australia the show has been broadcast on ABC1 and UKTV. In Bulgaria, GTV began airing the show in July 2008, while Comedy Central Germany started airing the first series in September 2009. ETV has aired the show in Estonia. In Poland it has been shown on Comedy Central Poland and TVP2. In the Czech Republic the show was broadcast on Česká televize and HBO. TV 2 Zulu has aired the show in Denmark, as has Comedy Central in the Netherlands. Canal+ runs the show in Spain. In the United States, episodes have been shown on IFC; all 4 series are also available for purchase in the iTunes Store. Canadian channel G4 Canada ran the show during their Adult Digital Distraction segment in July 2007. In Brazil the show has been broadcast on I.Sat. In Mexico the show has aired on Canal 11 since 2010. It was also broadcast in Spain on Canal 3xl during 2011.[26]

DVD releases[edit]
DVD	Region 1	Region 2	Region 4
The Complete Series 1	31 March 2009	13 November 2006	6 December 2006
The Complete Series 2	30 June 2009	1 October 2007	19 March 2009
The Complete Series 3	15 September 2009	16 March 2009	1 April 2010
The Complete Series 4	14 December 2010	27 September 2010	2 December 2010
'The Internet Is Coming'	TBA	TBA	18 December 2013[27][28]
Series 1[edit]
The first series was released in the UK as "The IT Crowd – Version 1.0" on 13 November 2006 by 2 Entertain Video Ltd. The DVD start-up sequence and subsequent menus are designed to resemble a ZX Spectrum. The DVD also included a short film written and directed by Linehan called Hello Friend, his directorial debut, and a tongue in cheek behind-the-scenes documentary presented by Ken Korda, a film maker created and portrayed by comedian Adam Buxton (of Adam and Joe).[29][30]

An American region (NTSC) release of the DVD was delayed due to a delay in the broadcast of the American adaptation. MPI Home Video released it on 31 March 2009.[31] The American version does not contain the audio commentaries which are found on the British version.

Series 2[edit]
"The IT Crowd – Version 2.0" DVD was released in the UK on 1 October 2007, together with a box set containing both the first and second series. Retail chain HMV sold an exclusive limited edition version featuring a set of four postcards in the style of popular viral photos such as Ceiling Cat — here replicated as Ceiling Goth. While the first series DVD menus parodied 8-bit games, the Series 2 DVD menus parody 16-bit games and make reference to Zero Wing (all your base meme), Mortal Kombat, Tetris and Lemmings. There are also several 'hidden' extras encoded into the subtitles. These are done in much the same way as the base64 subtitles from Series 1, and include three JPG images and a text adventure game file. Episode 4 has a BBC BASIC listing, and Episode 6 has light bars in the corner of the screen which can be decoded using a light reader.[29][30]

The American region DVD was released on 30 June 2009.

Series 3[edit]
A box-set containing series 1–3 was released in the UK on 16 March 2009 under the 2|entertain label. A single DVD featuring all six episodes was also released on 16 March 2009. As with both the series 1 and 2 DVDs, the menus are based on such internet games as GROW CUBE, Doeo and flow.

The American region DVD was released on 15 September 2009.

Series 4[edit]
The DVD for series 4 was released in the UK on 26 September 2010, also under the 2|entertain label.[32] A box-set containing all four series was also released on the same day, which includes an IT Crowd-themed board game.

The American region DVD was released on 14 December 2010.[33]

The DVD includes a documentary feature on the computer games which served as inspiration for the menus on each of the series' DVDs, culminating in the game Windosill, the basis for the Season 4 DVD.

Special[edit]
"The Internet Is Coming" was released in Australia 18 December 2013.[34]

Streaming availability[edit]
All four series of The IT Crowd are currently (as of May 2014) available via instant streaming on 4oD,[35] Netflix, and Hulu in selected areas.